Metamist docker tutorial (#145)
populationgenomics/team-docs: onboarding_documentation/technical_documentation/metamist_docker/metamist_docker_tutorial.md

At a pipeline level, there's very little need to actually build a query by hand, the pipeline abstracts this away from the user. However, it is still essential knowledge, especially if one wants to take a deep dive into a specific participant.

## 2. Build and publish a Docker image

At CPG each tool we use is packaged into a Docker image. This ensures that everyone is using the same version of the tool. It also allows us to easily run the tool on the cloud using Hail Batch.
[FastQE](https://github.com/fastqe/fastqe/) is a fun tool that mimics the output of FastQC (a more 'official' bioinformatic tool) but instead represents the quality scores with emojis. Clearly, FastQE is not intended for use in a production environment. However, it serves as an illustrative example of a tool currently missing from our library. To incorporate it, we need to construct a corresponding Docker image.

> Have a go at writing a Dockerfile for FastQE. Have a look at the [images](https://github.com/populationgenomics/images) repo to see how other images are built. **Hint:** You can use the `python:3.10-slim` image as a base image and will install FastQE version 0.3.1 using `pip`.

Reviewer: Yeah, that would work. If someone wants to read an example but not do the steps themselves, this is great - but the next person can't do this exact same thing

2. For each `SequencingGroup` ID:
    - Query Metamist for the location of the fastq files
    - Build a dictionary mapping the `SequencingGroup` ID to the location of the fastq files
3. Build a Hail Batch command that uses the FastQE image
    - Run FastQE on the fastq files

### Task: Write the query to get the `SequencingGroup` ID's of the samples we want to run FastQE on and the location of their reads files

- Tip: first import `gql` and `query` from `metamist.graphql`. Then write the query as a global variable and wrap it in a `gql()` call. Use the GraphQL interface to practice the query before writing it in Python.

<br>

<details>
  <summary>Click to see answer</summary>

```python
from metamist.graphql import gql, query

SG_ASSAY_QUERY = gql(
    """
    query ($project: String!) {
        sequencingGroups(project: {eq: $project}) {
            id
            assays {
                id
                meta
            }
        }
    }
    """
)
```

</details>
<br>

The next step is to iterate through the response of the above query and create a mapping of `SequencingGroup` ID's to the locations of the fastq files.

> ### Task: Write the function called `get_assays()` to map the `SequencingGroup` ID's to the locations of the fastq files

Reviewer: A ton of the content here could be separated out into an actual script, which you can reference in part (like with links to specific lines). I think you've probably go this script somewhere for the FQE process. Duplicating that code here makes this a massive document for not much extra benefit.

Personally I'd link out to a fully featured script which is mostly self-documenting, and have a section here just explaining the intent

The function we'll be writing will take the `SequencingGroup` ID as an argument and will update the `Analysis` of that `SequencingGroup` with the location of the output files. Within this function we will importing the necessary packages and functions as well as getting the necessary information from the config file.

- Tips:
  - `from cpg_utils.config import get_config` will give us access to the config file from which we can access via dictionary notation. For example, `get_config()['workflow']['dataset']` will return the name of the project we are running the analysis on.
  - The web bucket is a special bucket that allows us to host html files so they are directly visible in the browser, this bucket is located at `get_config()['storage']['default']['web_url']`. This link is what we will display in the `meta` field of the analysis.

<br>
<br>

<details>
<summary>Click to reveal function</summary>

```python

> def create_analysis_entry(

Reviewer: This and the following code block also probably exist in the other script, so they could be removed here

        # accessible from inside the job container, and unique to this batch/job
        cmd = f'fastqe {file_1} {file_2} --html > {j.out_fastqe}'
        j.command(
            # f'echo "Hello world, I am a job for {sg}!, using {file_1} and {file_2}"'
            # f'I\'m also creating an output file at {j.output}'
            # f'echo "Some outputs" > {j.output}'
            command(cmd)
        )
        j2 = b.new_python_job(f'Register analysis output for {sg}')
        j2.image(get_config()['workflow']['driver_image'])
        j2.call(create_analysis_entry, sg)
        j2.depends_on(j)
        # read the output out into GCP
        # The helper method output_path() will create a new path based on the current project,
        # test/main, and the output prefix provided to analysis_runner
        # -o my_output
        # --dataset my-dataset
        # --access_level test
        # output_path('this_file.txt')
        # -> gs://cpg-my-dataset-test/my_output/this_file.txt
        b.write_output(
            j.out_fastqe, output_path(f'{sg}.html', category='web')
        )  # category='web' writes it to the web bucket
    b.run(wait=False)
```

</details>
<br>

> Putting it all together, our python script should look like this:

Reviewer: As previously, it makes sense to explain what this script would do and link to it, rather than recreating a full script in the documentation

# Introduction

The aim of the following exercise is to allow you to get first hand experience working with the CPG codebase, the tools used to conduct analyses, as well as the supporting infrastructure that enables the management and utilisation of data.

> 

Reviewer 2: It would be nice to specify what 'first hand experience' will entail. What will the user be able to do at the end of the tutorial?  This would help the user select this tutorial if they were looking through documentation.  

How is the tutorial structured and what is the significance of that structure?

## Table of Contents

1. [Query metamist for `.fastq` files](#1-query-metamist-for-fastq-files)
2. [Build and publish a Docker image](#2-build-and-publish-a-docker-image)
3. [Write a script to run FastQE](#3-write-a-script-to-run-fastqe)
4. [Update Metamist with the location of the output files](#4-update-metamist-with-the-location-of-the-output-files)
5. [Run the jobs through analysis runner](#5-run-the-jobs-through-analysis-runner)
6. [Pull the output and visualise](#6-pull-the-output-and-visualise)

## 1. Query metamist for `.fastq` files

> 

Reviewer 2: What will the user achieve in this section?

> The first step in understanding Metamist is to understand how to query the database so that we can get the necessary information on our samples. Metamist is used to track file locations, participant IDs, statuses of samples (i.e. the location of the files on Google Cloud, whether the the `.fastq` files have been aligned to form`.cram`s, whether there is a `.vcf` file available, and whether the sample has been joint called with other samples). Metamist is CPG's way of keeping track of everything.

Reviewer 2: Suggest defining metamist clearly as CPG's metadata db and providing a link to the documentation. 

What is 'everything' when we are "Keeping track of everything"?

                                  "basename": "sandbox_fastq_SB_001_2.fastq.gz",
                                  "class": "File",
                                  "checksum": null,
                                  "size": 92618,
                                  "datetime_added": "2024-02-15T22:15:42.391000+00:00"
                              }
                          ],
                          "sequencing_type": "genome",
                          "sequencing_technology": "short-read",
                          "sequencing_platform": "illumina"
                      }
                  }
              ],
              "sample": {
                  "externalId": "sandbox_fastq_SB_001"
                }
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

In the above output we can see that for `SequencingGroup` `CPG348821` there is a set of reads (forward and reverse) that have been uploaded to Google Cloud Storage. We can also see that the `sequencing_type` is `genome` and the `sequencing_technology` is `short-read`. We can also see that the `externalId` of the `sample` is `sandbox_fastq_SB_001`.

## 2. Build and publish a Docker image

> 

Reviewer 2: What will the user achieve in this section?

<details>
  <summary>Click to see answer</summary>

```Docker
FROM python:3.10-slim

ARG VERSION=${VERSION:-0.3.1}
RUN pip install fastqe==${VERSION}
```

</details>
<br>

Save the above in a file named `Dockerfile` and push it to the `images` repo, create a PR and as is standard practice in CPG you will have to nominate someone to review this PR so that it can be merged into main and the image can be used by `analysis-runner` when we run the job.

CLI command to build the image:

```bash
docker build -t fastqe_image:1.0.0 . --platform=linux/amd64
```

Note that we need to specify the platform as linux/amd64 because we are building the image on a Mac. If you are building the image on a Linux machine, you can omit the --platform flag. However, when creating an image for our infrastructure, this won't be necessary. Docker files should be platform agnostic, meaning that if a build is successful on both your local machine and the GitHub server, the resulting images should be identical. This is beneficial for testing purposes, but it's not a prerequisite for creating images within our infrastructure.

## 3. Write a script to run FastQE

> 

Reviewer 2: What will the user achieve in this section?

        # test/main, and the output prefix provided to analysis_runner
        # -o my_output
        # --dataset my-dataset
        # --access_level test
        # output_path('this_file.txt')
        # -> gs://cpg-my-dataset-test/my_output/this_file.txt
        b.write_output(
            j.out_fastqe, output_path(f'{sg}-{last_name}.html', category='web')
        )  # category='web' writes it to the web bucket
    b.run(wait=False)

    # endregion

if __name__ == '__main__':
    # optional direct input of samples
    parser = ArgumentParser(description='Hail Batch FastQE')
    parser.add_argument('--project', help='Project name', required=True)
    parser.add_argument(
        '--sgids', nargs='+', help='Sequencing group IDs', required=True
    )
    parser.add_argument(
        '--last-name', help='Last name', required=True
    )
    args, fails = parser.parse_known_args()

    if fails:
        raise ValueError(f'Failed to parse arguments: {fails}')
    main(project=args.project, sgids=args.sgids, last_name=args.last_name)
```

</details>
<br>
<br>

## 5. Run the jobs through analysis runner

> 

Reviewer 2: What will the user achieve in this section?

- Furthermore, tracing back from a `SequencingGroup` to a `Family`, we discover that a `Family` comprises participants who share genetic relationships. External collaborators use external IDs to refer to families, while our internal system assigns both family and participant IDs to facilitate efficient tracking.
- **Summary**: `Participants` can have many `Samples`. `Samples` are used to generate `Assays`. A fixed set of `Assays` form a `SequencingGroup`. If we were to go back and re-run an assay on that sample, this would produce a new `SequencingGroup`.

<div style="text-align: center;">
    <img src="sequencing_group_relationships.png" width="750">
</div>

> Let's first work with Metamist and GraphQL using the GUI. Navigate to <https://sample-metadata.populationgenomics.org.au/> to see the homepage of CPG's Metamist implementation.

Author: Changed!

Each Docker image is a minimal file system and associated software, which runs as a computer that we can pass data into, and run software inside of to generate results. Our library of Docker images serve different purposes - some are minimal with only a single installed tool, some are more general purpose and have a wide range of tools installed. Our [Images repository](https://github.com/populationgenomics/images) is where we maintain build instructions, called Dockerfiles.

These Docker Images are versioned and kept indefinitely - if multiple processes run using the same Docker Image, we know that each separate process will use the exact same software versions, and should run in a predictable and reproducible way.

The workflow management software we use at the CPG is called [Hail Batch](https://hail.is/docs/batch/service.html) - this allows us to specify a different Docker image for each step of a workflow, and metadata for each run records the name and version of each Image used. This is one of the ways in which CPG runs aim to be reproducible, e.g. if we need to go back and repeat a prior experiment we can be confident of the software used.

> [FastQE](https://github.com/fastqe/fastqe/) is a fun tool that mimics the output of FastQC (a more 'official' bioinformatic tool) but instead represents the quality scores with emojis. Clearly, FastQE is not intended for use in a production environment. However, it serves as an illustrative example of a tool currently missing from our library. To incorporate it, we need to construct a corresponding Docker image.

Author: Have changed accordingly 🙂

Let's walk through an example of writing a Dockerfile using FastQE. You can refer to the [images](https://github.com/populationgenomics/images) repo to see how other images are built. **Note:** This is just an example for practice. When you're creating your own Dockerfile, you should try to do this yourself. However, to avoid duplication, please do not push these practice images to the repo.

In this example, we'll use the `python:3.10-slim` image as a base image and install FastQE version 0.3.1 using `pip`.

<details>
  <summary>Click to see answer</summary>

```Docker
FROM python:3.10-slim

ARG VERSION=${VERSION:-0.3.1}
RUN pip install fastqe==${VERSION}
```

</details>
<br>

> Save the above in a file named `Dockerfile` and push it to the `images` repo, create a PR and as is standard practice in CPG you will have to nominate someone to review this PR so that it can be merged into main and the image can be used by `analysis-runner` when we run the job.

Reviewer 3: I think some ordered steps here might be clearer:

```suggestion
If you wanted to submit this image to be used by the wider CPG:

1. Clone the `images` repo, and create a branch for this image,
2. Create the Dockerfile, you could test the build locally by running a `docker build` (see below),
3. You can issue a test build in the images repository, pushing your image to a container registry that a test account can access,
4. On PR approval and merge, you can deploy your image for use in production workflows.
```

CLI command to build the image:

> ```bash
> docker build -t fastqe_image:1.0.0 . --platform=linux/amd64
> ```
> 
> Note that we need to specify the platform as linux/amd64 because we are building the image on a Mac. If you are building the image on a Linux machine, you can omit the --platform flag. However, when creating an image for our infrastructure, this won't be necessary. Docker files should be platform agnostic, meaning that if a build is successful on both your local machine and the GitHub server, the resulting images should be identical. This is beneficial for testing purposes, but it's not a prerequisite for creating images within our infrastructure.

Reviewer 3: Improving the accuracy of this messaging. They are not technically identical between chipsets, but should be functionally equivalent.

``````suggestion
```bash
docker build -t fastqe_image:0.3.5 . # <-- don't forget the trailing '.'

# If using an M series Macbook, you'll need to specify `--platform=linux/amd64`
docker build \
    -t fastqe_image:0.3.5 \
    --platform=linux/amd64 \
    .
```

Note: We use x86 processors for production workloads (default on GCP), so this flag won't be necessary. Docker files are relatively platform agnostic, meaning that if a build is successful on both your local machine and the GitHub server, the resulting images _should_ be _functionally_ identical. This is beneficial for testing purposes, but it's not a prerequisite for creating images within our infrastructure.
``````

## 3. Write a script to run FastQE

In this section, we'll craft a script that leverages Hail Batch and the FastQE image we just made. This script will execute the FastQE tool on the `.fastq` files that we previously retrieved from Metamist. After completing this section you will have an understanding of how Hail Batch uses Docker images to run analyses and how to write a script that uses Hail Batch to run an analysis.

> The basic outline of our script is going to be:

Reviewer 3: Are we intending for users to run this, if so we should add instructions on branching, and committing changes so they can follow along.

For a run through on how to submit jobs using analysis runner, please see the [analysis runner tutorial](https://github.com/populationgenomics/team-docs/tree/main/exercise-analysis-runner) in the team-docs repo.

```bash
pip install analysis-runner==2.43.4
```

The `--image` flag in the analysis-runner command line is specifically designed to specify an alternative image to the standard analysis-runner driver image. This alternative image must contain all necessary dependencies to handle authentication, create Hail batches, and perform other required tasks.

In the context of our FastQE example, we will not use this `--image` flag. Instead, we will execute a script within the standard driver image that initiates a new batch. Within this batch, one of the jobs will employ the FastQE image we previously built as specified by the `j.image(image_path('fastqe'))`. The process of localising and delocalising input and output files would be managed directly by Hail, not by the FastQE image.

```bash
analysis-runner \

>   --dataset sandbox --description "Testing running tutorial" --output-dir "sandbox_fastqe" \

Reviewer 3: Put these ones on separate lines to remain consistent

In this example, we'll use the `python:3.10-slim` image as a base image and install FastQE version 0.3.1 using `pip`.

<details>
  <summary>Click to see answer</summary>

```Docker
FROM python:3.10-slim

ARG VERSION=${VERSION:-0.3.1}
RUN pip install fastqe==${VERSION}
```

</details>
<br>

If you wanted to submit this image to be used by the wider CPG:

1. Clone the `images` repo, and create a branch for this image,
2. Create the Dockerfile, you could test the build locally by running a `docker build` (see below),
3. You can issue a test build in the images repository, pushing your image to a container registry that a test account can access,
4. On PR approval and merge, you can deploy your image for use in production workflows.

CLI command to build the image:

```bash
docker build -t fastqe_image:0.3.5 . # <-- don't forget the trailing '.'

# If using an M series Macbook, you'll need to specify `--platform=linux/amd64`
docker build \
    -t fastqe_image:0.3.5 \
    --platform=linux/amd64 \
    .

> ```

Author: Steps 3 and 4 are steps to deploy the image as a usable image in the CPG infrastructure - beyond the scope of this tutorial but outlining the next steps to round out the purpose of building and using a Docker image.
